The coming wave

ACCORDING to one estimate, between 150 to 200 Venezuelans enter this country 
every week by boat. And with the State’s proposed amnesty period due to open in 
just over a week, the traffic is likely to pick up. So that while the Ministry 
of National Security has received conflicting reports over a possible capsize of 
a pirogue carrying Venezuelans, Minister of National Security Stuart Young needs 
to send a clearer signal that this country will take its obligations under 
international law seriously when it comes to search-and-rescue operations.
Questioned in the Senate on Tuesday over a report that a pirogue capsized 
leading to the drowning of several passengers, Young said all that had been 
verified was that a person was picked up by a private marine vessel on its way 
to Grenada. He added the Coast Guard had liaised with Venezuelan counterparts 
and patrolled in the general area and found nothing.
While reports of this nature are difficult to verify before action is taken, the 
situation demands a more proactive approach in light of the clear history of 
vessels sinking in the Gulf of Paria, practices adopted by those being smuggled 
into the country, as well as the upcoming amnesty window which will bring ever 
greater volumes through our ports.
Young’s appearance in the Senate on Tuesday was a missed opportunity to update 
the nation on the fate of the reported 34 people who were on board a ten-metre 
fishing boat which sunk in April. Initially, 11 people were reported rescued. 
Are we to assume the remaining passengers have drowned?
TT has obligations under international law to help people who are lost at sea. 
Since 1989, we acceded to the International Convention on Maritime Search and 
Rescue which states that, “on receiving information that any person is, or 
appears to be, in distress at sea, the responsible authorities…shall take urgent 
steps to ensure that the necessary assistance is provided.”
While scarce national resources cannot be deployed flippantly, the nature of the 
migrant flows from Venezuela means it is impractical to expect every single 
aspect of a report to be perfectly verified before that report is taken 
seriously.
For instance, the vessel that sank in April was carrying 25 named people and 
nine unnamed people. It would be impossible to confirm the identities of the 
nine before a search-and-rescue operation is undertaken. At the same time, it is 
possible that mischief-makers intent on diverting national security assets to 
serve their own ends could send authorities on wild goose chases.
For these reasons, strong protocols and surveillance procedures need to be in 
place to ensure that every report does not catch authorities off guard when it 
comes either to disproving it or forming the basis for mobilisation of 
resources. Are we ready for the coming wave?