THE Government’s penchant simply to announce fait accompli decisions without 
public input and with minimum information was again on display last week.
First, at a reception for a delegation from Shanghai, China, Port of Spain Mayor 
Joel Martinez announced that the main business section of Charlotte Street, from 
Park Street to Independence Square, is to be officially designated “Chinatown”. 
Next came an announcement from Housing Minister Edmund Dillon that the 
Government has contracted Chinese firm, China Gezhouba International Engineering 
Company Ltd (CGGC), to build about 5,000 housing units across the country, 
beginning with 204 low to mid-income apartments at South Quay, Port of Spain and 
another 235 at Lady Hailes Avenue in San Fernando.
Apart from the sparse information provided in the announcements, the public 
knows nothing about either project. In the case of the housing contract no 
details were provided on whether it went out for tender, how the expansion of 
housing further south of the city fits into a development plan for the 
regeneration of Port of Spain or how the errors made in nearby housing projects 
which have helped to fuel crime, for example, are being taken into account.
In the case of the plan to designate Charlotte Street as “Chinatown”, Mayor 
Martinez said it was all part of the twinning of Port of Spain with Shanghai 
under China’s Belt and Road Initiative. According to him, it will create an 
“ideal environment” for developing “new cooperation techniques, exchange of 
experiences as well as joint reflections on specific issues that will find 
solutions and bring improvements”.
What exactly this means is anybody’s guess. The only specific detail known about 
this is that the entry and exit points at Park Street and Independence Square 
will be marked by the name on arches to be built by Shanghai Construction. It 
remains unknown what considerations, if any, Mayor Martinez had taken into 
account in making this decision nor which interests, if any, he had consulted 
in doing so.
It is true that several Chinese immigrants launched their business careers on 
Charlotte Street. It was at #31 Charlotte Street, for example, that a 
20-year-old Carlton Mack took up a job as a grocery attendant with a small 
Chinese business, Allums’ Kwong Hing Co Ltd, from where he blazed a trail that 
spawned the supermarket and land development empire known today under the 
JT Allum brand.
However, it is also the street where many migrants - from rural sugar estates, 
from islands notably the eastern Caribbean, the Middle East, and elsewhere put 
down roots in vending, trading and other forms of commerce. As one of the oldest 
streets in the capital, it is also at the corner of what is today Charlotte and 
Independence Square that the Spanish Governor Chacon constructed “Government 
House”.
The history of Charlotte Street warrants its recognition as a heritage location 
but, unfortunately, nothing of its rich past is communicated by declaring it 
another of the world’s Chinatowns as if the sum of its being is as an enclave of 
one strand of its history.
The proposed designation of Charlotte Street and the housing plan for South both 
require public consultation.