Mr Imbert's campaign budget

As predicted, Finance Minister Colm Imbert was at his upbeat best in delivering his mid-year review of the economy 
in Parliament yesterday.
With his stride unbroken by BPTT's bad news about gas supply problems to Atlantic's Train 1, the minister gave a 
glowing report on the performance of the economy which was full of self-congratulation. Equally predictable was the
electioneering that came wrapped up in it.
With local government elections in the offing and a general election just around that corner, Minister Imbert loosened 
the purse strings to increase the Government's expenditure this year by $300 million which, with a drop in revenue, has 
expanded the deficit by just over half a billion dollars.
At certain points, his address sounded more like a campaign speech as he reached back into the record of previous PNM 
administrations to embellish the Government's performance. From his vantage point inside the Government, Minister Imbert
clearly sees the glass half-filled and, as such, was unsparing in his condemnation of "naysayers" who see it half-empty 
or worse.
His confidence is premised on the likely impact of releasing the tight hold that he has kept on expenditure, much to the 
disadvantage of economic activity. The question now is whether he will prove to be correct in his assumptions about how
the economy will respond to the release of funds at this point in the life of the Keith Rowley administration.
By Minister Imbert's own calculation, he has succeeded in stabilising the economy "with revenue and expenditure now in 
broad alignment" and has thus created a "solid foundation on which transformation and growth would now be anchored". 
At the risk of being criticised for naysaying, we must take issue with Minister Imbert's definitions. It could be argued 
that what he sees as stability is really paralysis, and that when it comes to his use of such terms as "transformation" -
well one hardly knows what he is talking about. His economic strategies are entirely premised on the behaviour of the 
energy economy, including elements of what he describes as the non-energy which themselves depend on the performance of 
the energy sector.
The proof of Minister Imbert's pudding will be tested in the coming months as the impact of his increased expenditure
becomes evident. He is clearly betting that it will stimulate economic activity. However, that assumption very much
depends on whether the public shares his confidence about the economy. Where Minister Imbert sees an admirably low 
inflation rate, others may see an economy being dragged down by low consumer demand; what he hails as "unprecedented 
growth in income and profits" of local banks may be seen by others as the symptoms of an economy increasingly polarised 
between profits and poverty. 
Minister Imbert has accused some of his critics of negative generalisations about the economy. The fact is that everyone,
including him, is generalising because of the absence of scientific data on a broad spectrum of factors necessary for 
making a more precise analysis of the behaviour of the economy. In such an environment, if Minister Imbert's calculations
prove wrong, he will have to dig even deeper, to find even more.