Fugitive videos

SOMETHING like this was bound to happen sooner or later. In a world saturated 
with social media, that high-profile fugitives from the law turned to social 
media to make their primetime debut was inevitable. The video recording in which 
Olatungi Denbow and Michael Findley appear is another sign of a complete 
disregard for law and order.
That such a video could be made, uploaded and openly disseminated across 
communication networks that rely on state infrastructure will be regarded as yet 
another embarrassment for the law enforcement authorities already reeling from 
the humiliation of the initial escape and the grounding of a national security 
helicopter.
It’s the kind of thing that might happen in a soap opera like No Boundaries – a 
development that makes people ask whether TT is a real place. But the dire 
realities facing the criminal justice system are no figment of the imagination.
We hold no brief for those who flee justice but delays in the system continue to 
undermine the presumption of innocence to the extent that the very notion of 
justice is challenged. On the one hand, we now have fugitives asking via online 
videos for their trial to start when through their actions they remove 
themselves from the reach of the courts. Whatever grouses they may have with 
state witnesses, naming such witnesses and slandering them live on social media 
is not an appropriate way to challenge evidence.
For good reason, trials provide a means of challenging testimony in courtrooms 
where the facts as alleged by the prosecution can be tested. The public cannot 
be asked, via Facebook, to adjudicate on what jurors and judges, appraised of 
all the relevant facts, spend months carefully sifting through.
As we are now clearly in a new age, serious thought should be given to 
developing standards and protocols to deal with direct appeals made on social 
media by people accused of wrong. How is the State to balance freedom of 
expression with the need to protect legal processes from pre-trial publicity?
At the same time, we must implore authorities to act on complaints raised about 
the prison service. We have already called, on this page, for a national inquiry 
into prison conditions considering a range of events, starting with the deadly 
jailbreak of 2015 in Port of Spain right up to this month’s development. At the 
very least, the complaints raised by senior prison officials, since 2013, over 
poor lighting at the Remand Yard at Golden Grove Prison, Arouca, should be 
addressed.
The report requested by Prisons Commissioner Gerard Wilson will undoubtedly shed 
more light. But the timeline for the submission of this report – a full 30 days 
– is simply too long given the urgency of this matter. While stagnant 
bureaucracy is holding the justice system back, fugitives are exploiting the 
latest technology to suit their agendas.