Beetham facility must not go to waste

Wastage in T&T seems to be a practice which citizens, and by extension 
governments, seem all too willing to engage in all while overlooking its 
ramifications. 
From the loss of our now scarce water resources through leaks which the Water 
and Sewerage Authority (WASA) cannot seem to bring under control, to everyday 
wastage in our homes, citizens appear comfortable with allowing things they can
control to instead be lost for good. That is, of course, until they realise the 
value of the item or resource. 
This is why we are pained at Public Utilities Minister Robert Le Hunte's 
statement that the near $1 billion spent so far on the unfinished Beetham 
Wastewater Recycling Plant may go to naught because Government does not intend 
to complete the project, which Mr Le Hunte says was ill-conceived. The minister 
made the announcement at the Savonetta Booster Pump Station commissioning on 
Friday, as he revealed US$250 million would be needed to complete the plant.
Giving details, Minister Le Hunte said it would cost taxpayers $3 billion to 
complete the plant while it will provide just ten million more gallons of water
capacity per day - unfeasible given the country's current economic struggles. 
Government also believes it can currently provide the same ten million gallons 
of water daily with an expenditure of $200 million via projects now being 
considered for WASA to increase water production.
To put this into further context, Minister Le Hunte is also on record as saying 
WASA needs $12.7 billion to fix major issues affecting its water supply and 
distribution. It will cost $10 billion to replace 7,200 kilometres of ageing 
pipelines, $1.2 billion to install water metres at homes, businesses and
industrial areas, $1 billion to fix interconnectivity issues and $500 million 
to improve its water storage capacity. So on a first look, it would appear the 
Government can neither afford the $2 billion more to complete the Beetham waste
water project nor the $12.7 billion to completely fix all WASA's woes. Hidden 
inside Mr Le Hunte's breakdown of WASA's issues is the fact that it would cost 
$500 million to fix the storage capacity aspect of its operations, a vital 
element in times like now when the country is thirsting for potable water.
Having said that, it is not possible to salvage the Beetham project by 
converting it into a water storage facility? Surely, more storage tanks can be
added to the existing ones on the project with the ultimate intention of
servicing the capital with water in the first instance. We calculate this would
be less than the $500 million needed to fix the cheapest aspect of WASA's woes.
So moving forward, while the final outcome of the lawsuit against the project 
contractor is pending, we hope the facility will be salvaged for citizens'
benefit instead of it being allowed to rot away.      