Barefaced savagery

NOT ONLY must security arrangements at the St. Pius Boys RC Primary School be 
revamped in light of the barbaric stabbing of a teacher on its premises in front
of students, but a nationwide review of security at schools is in order given
the disturbing recurrence of these horrific incidents.
What happened at St. Pius is a case study in human misery. A woman, brutally
assaulted. Children, forever traumatised. An assailant, to a lesser degree, 
himself a victim, along with his family. And a security guard who must live with
the knowledge that they were on duty when this outrageous lapse occurred.
It is one thing to have plans and protocols in place. It is another to implement
those plans effectively. And to sustain that implementation over time. This is 
why it is essential for schools to constantly review and refine arrangements to 
suit their resources. But the matter is so important it merits an involved 
approach from the Ministry of Education's officials who must ensure nationwide 
standards are being met. All must be responsive to the feedback of the key 
stakeholders: parents, teachers, children, workers.
It is unacceptable that the assailant was able to sneak through because the 
guard was otherwise occupied by other visitors. School entryways should be 
secure areas in order to prevent precisely a thing. Was this a failure of 
design? The weapon of choice is also instructive. Metal scanners can easily 
detect metallic objects that could be used to do harm. Perhaps that time has 
come for these scanners to be universal.
This stabbing is just the latest act of brazen savagery to take place in a 
school. In February, the principal of Tunapuna Hindu Primary School, Jeewan
Ramdhanie, was beaten by a parent with a baton.
All of this is happening in the context of a society that seems intent to return
to violence, where people are acting ruthlessly and in broad daylight in front
of onlookers, without fear or shame. Unabashed malice. The footage of the
sickening attack on a man and a woman after a crash on the Churchill-Roosevelt
Highway on Monday churns the stomach. As does the murder of a 14-year-old girl 
alongside two others in a Carenage shootout as the day came to an end. And the 
murder, beating and robbery of tourists, including a couple walking on Grafton 
Beach, Tobago, on a Sunday afternoon.
What are we doing to contain this? Violent crime seems to be going out of 
control and the authorities must be troubled, especially when a school premises,
is yet again, pierced by bloodshed.
No matter how hopeful our aspirations as expressed through things like the
mid-year review, what matters most is getting to grips with our security and
ending the bloodshed. 