Celebrating Harold Hoyte

The One Caribbean Media Group (OCM) which includes the Express newspaper today
pays respect to Barbados-born Caribbean visionary Harold Hoyte, whose recent 
passing we mourn.
Mr Hoyte was founding editor of the Nation (part of the OCM group), the dominant
newspaper in Barbados for much of its existence over the last 46 years. He was 
one of the leading lights in the formation of OCM. In paying her own tribute to 
him, OCM CEO Dawn Thomas described Mr Hoyte as a great champion both of press 
freedom and of Caribbean unity. Personally, she said, she was "grateful for the 
wealth of wisdom" she gained from him over the years, and "for the many words of 
wisdom during challenging times. He will be sincerely missed, but his remarkable 
legacy will live on".
Mr Hoyte started his career in media as a copywriter with the Barbados Advocate 
in 1959. He would later move to Toronto, Canada, where he worked with the Globe 
and Mail newspaper and the Toronto Telegram, before becoming editor of the 
Contrast, Toronto's first black newspaper. He would return to Barbados in 1973, 
and pursued a dream and a vision, defying considerable odds in the process. With 
a group of courageous friends and associates, he launched the Nation newspaper, 
and would spend the next 30 years as its editor, then editor-in-chief. After his
retirement he remained as editor emeritus, providing valuable guidance and 
direction to those at the helm.
Describing him as "a regional media champion," OCM noted in its public tribute 
to Mr Hoyte that he was "moved by the limited success of the regional 
integration movement (Caricom) as well as earlier efforts". To this end, he 
dedicated his energies towards making this a reality in his chosen fields of 
journalism and business.
For the stellar contributions he made on these fronts over the succeeding 
decades, he was to garner a long list of rewards and honours. These included 
such citations as Honorary Fellow, University of the West Indies, Honorary 
Doctor of Letters, University of the West Indies, Director of Eastern Caribbean
Press Council, Member of the Commonwealth Press Union and of the Inter-American
Press Association.
In 2003 he was awarded the Gold Crown of Merit by the Barbados government. 
Further afield, he was awarded the Maria Cabot Moors Award for press freedom
by Columbia University. He was appointed to the board of the Barbados Central
Bank and was also Deputy Chairman of the Barbados Law and Order Commission, and
Chairman of the Substance Abuse Foundation.
Above all, however, Harold Hoyte was among the most visionary leaders and 
innovators in Caribbean journalism for the decades during which he influenced 
generations across our region. His commitment to fairness, integrity and 
fearlessness in pursuit of the truth has become legendary to those who knew and 
worked with him.
With some of those values captured in the several books he authored, his example 
remains a deep inspiration for generations to come.   