Grade F

THE BREACHES during Wednesday's CXC mathematics examinations at the Tranquility
Government Secondary School were as multitudinous as they were brazen. Students
were left unsupervised, some entered the room with unauthorised devices, some 
walked around the room, some communicated with others, some indulged in unfair
and dishonest practices by sharing the exam script, some shared their answers
live on social media. And that's what we know so far.
We know enough to award a failing grade to the invigilators who allowed this to
happen. Scrutiny must be placed on the selection and training of such
invigilators. Their job is to ensure an orderly and fair environment and to keep 
an eye out for any irregularities. At no point should they be missing in action
or asleep at the wheel.
The saddest part of this, however, is the lack of guilty conscience on the part
of the students implicated. How could they feel such conduct was permissible? 
Social media and its supporting technology have become ubiquitous, yes, but a
basic sense of right and wrong should push students to better behaviour. Sharing 
answers, and broadcasting them online to boot, can never be appropriate. Did 
they think this was a mock exam?
It is for CXC to determine the appropriate course of action, which includes the 
option of banning the students from sitting future examinations for a period of 
up to two years. Whatever decision is taken, it is a shame the students have 
disgraced themselves in this way. They have given their school and this country
a bad name.
What is particularly painful is the fact that even innocent students in the room
may have to bear the consequences for the actions of a few. Examinations are
stressful enough. It is sad that students now have to worry about their efforts
being scuttled by a few bad apples.
Something is dramatically wrong for a scandal like this to happen in the first 
place. Clearly, there needs to be stricter control over what enters the 
examination room and who does the supervision. 
The Tranquility incident should act as a reminder for all schools to review 
measures in place to ensure systems are watertight. The Ministry of Education 
also needs to take a closer look at the selection of invigilators as well as the 
terms and conditions governing their employment. The seasonal nature of the work
belies its gravity, as this scandal all too well demonstrates.
"You have to check the wristwatches now," says TTUTA second vice president Kyrla
Robertson-Thomas.
The breach is even more worrying coming amid intense scrutiny over security 
arrangements at schools in the wake of violent incidents involving parents. 
Though the instances of violence are far worse, we cannot help but wonder if 
adult misbehaviour is setting the tone for children who are now simply following
in their footsteps.    