Abusive cops must be held accountable

WITHIN one week, the High Court made two rulings on malicious prosecution of 
citizens by police officers that cannot be ignored by the Police Service 
Commission (PSC) and the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service (TTPS).
In both cases the rights of citizens were arbitrarily violated; they suffered 
beatings and incarceration.
Further, the cost incurred by the State in both recent judgments will be 
substantial, added to the costs awarded in all the other rulings in favour of 
complainants against police misbehaviour.
The initiative of Police Commissioner Gary Griffith to restore trust and 
confidence in police officers and the rule of law, and the well-resourced 
campaign by the commissioner’s wife, Nicole Dyer-Griffith, encouraging citizens 
to support the Police Service risk defeat by these judgments if justice is left 
incomplete.
Completion of the accountability process must include discipline, proportionate 
to the offence, for the identified officers.
Far too often police officers found in breach of laws and regulations governing 
their behaviour either face no consequence or a rap on the wrist.
An example of the latter was the police officer who turned away a naked rape 
victim on the grounds that she could not enter a police station unclothed; the 
consequence for him was loss of one day’s pay.
An example of the former was the case of a woman caught in a road block and made 
to strip down to her underwear on the shoulder of a highway; during the case the 
court heard that the incident was not reported to senior officers and no action 
had been taken against the offending officers.
Police officers have sweeping powers under the law, a point this newspaper 
repeats to underscore the high level of accountability required to balance those 
powers with citizens’ rights.
In one case pronounced upon within the past seven days, police misbehaviour 
included physical beatings and incarceration.
In the other, PC Shiva Hosein is accused of planting evidence on a citizen’s 
property in order to facilitate an arrest and seek information on another person 
of interest.
A common suggestion has been for the burden of costs to be borne by offending 
police officers themselves rather than by the State.
That is neither a practical nor desirable solution.
Instead, we agree with Justice Frank Seepersad who, in his ruling in favour of 
Sherwin Thompson last Wednesday, directed focus where it belongs: on the 
internal disciplinary infrastructure within the TTPS, and the PSC, the 
independent body responsible for matters of policing.
Sherwin Thompson and Kerryn Kissoon must feel they have received some measure of 
justice for the ill done to them by members of the TTPS. But we wonder about 
others who may have suffered or are suffering as a result of malicious police 
behaviour but who have not taken their matters to the High Court.
On their behalf, too, the PSC and the TTPS must demonstrate willingness to 
remediate swiftly, thus signalling to other officers who may be so minded to 
halt their abuses.